Just one, two, three, four, test, test, test, test, test, test, test, test.
I'm talking with Dr. John Warnock.
I guess, you know, let's start, if we might, with the inspiration from Octavo, which I understand came from your own collection.
Maybe if we could just kind of start and enter a conversation.
OK.
I think it was 1987.
We were going through the Grosvenor House Antique Fair in London.
I think it was June of 1987.
And my son came up and said, Dad, you've got to look at this.
We were at Mag's stall.
And he said, this is Euclid's first English edition of Euclid.
And it was 1570, a John Day's copy, and it has all the marvelous pop-ups in it.
And so I said...
I looked through this book, and I said, this is a totally amazing book.
It's a beautiful book.
I don't know where you've ever seen a copy of this yet.
And I said, I have to have this.
So I looked at the price tag.
I said, well, we went public.
I poured this.
You went public.
What he read is he just seemed to have just taken Adobe public.
That's right, yes.
So I bought it.
And you bring this book home, and you're gentle man this book is so appropriate because
You put it up on the shelf, and it's the only book of its kind up there.
Hi, folks.
Hi.
Would you like something to drink?
Are you going to have just sparkling water?
Is that a grano okay?
Yeah, that'd be great.
That sounds good.
Three?
Yeah, thanks.
So you put it up on the shelf, and it's the only book like that.
And you say, well, it clearly needs friends.
That's a very slippery slope.
So I start it.
And then I started... I was totally a neophyte.
Then I started learning about... So you're anticipating my questions.
Yeah.
Did you ask if you were a bibliophile prior to this?
Not really.
I was sort of a neophyte.
What was it about you, Clint?
Well, I was a mathematician.
So I studied my undergraduate degrees, my bachelor's and master's in mathematics.
And I really liked geometry.
And so...
Euclid, the old book, being in the printing business through Adobe, having an appreciation for type and early books.
What was there about handling that book?
Was there something, the tactility of it that went beyond the content?
Oh, the fact... It is relevant to Octavo.
Yes, I think that I hadn't realized that all the early books were really in wonderful shape and would never deteriorate because they had all rag-based papers and...
I just hadn't really appreciated the diversity of topography that they had used, or all of the printing devices, or the cache words, or all of this stuff.
And here you're just holding an artifact of history that just really must have had an impact at the time that it was printed.
Was it a palpable?
Oh, absolutely.
Physical?
Oh, yes, absolutely.
Do you think they'd engage all the senses?
Oh, I think so.
I think so.
It has a very definite feel about it, a very definite weight about it.
I mean, there's a wonderful smell to it.
It's gorgeous.
It does engage all these sexes in it.
It does.
I bought a bunch of stuff that I shouldn't have bought.
Like what?
Might I ask, like what?
Oh, a bad copy of Darwin.
that I eventually got rid of, and I bought some books that were relevant.
Then I was introduced to Quaritch, and to... Arthur Freeman?
Yeah, and Jonathan Hill, and Rick Watson.
You edited it.
Yes.
I got to know all of the dealers, Stephen Lowenthal, and they...
So I, gosh, here is a guy who's clearly interested in this, wants to go hunting.
Also, I got introduced early to a copy of Printing in the Mind of Man.
And that one will, that one traps you.
Well, it seems to define your collection.
Yes.
Well, it's... The scope of it.
Yes, it's actually diversified a great deal off of that since.
But that's clearly how it started.
Great ideas.
Yes.
Books that... Yes.
Well, as an undergraduate, I majored in mathematics and philosophy.
I had a double major.
So I read Kant and Hume and Descartes and Leibniz and all of those.
So you had a liberal education.
I got a liberal education.
Important, isn't it?
Yes.
For a man who became... That's right.
And also founding Adobe and...
having an impact on a printing industry that had 500 years of history associated with it.
I had learned a lot about typography and a lot about the traditions of type and the invention of the various technological advances in printing.
And so these two interests sort of came together and the books became important.
Approximately how many volumes would you say you have?
Not very many, but they're good.
About a hundred, I would guess.
Yes.
A hundred choice books.
Always a hundred choice works.
Probably 60 out of printing, I would guess.
60 or 70.
So that's probably your goal?
Is it your goal to try and get them?
No.
No, I gave up that.
That would be an okay goal.
My goal is actually to buy the books I like.
And that's diversified.
So...
If something strikes my fancy or I see something and say, God, I really would like to have that book, then I'd buy it.
I'm sorry, what year did you say this began?
87.
So that was 14 years ago, you were 56 or something like that?
No, I'm 60.
But I mean, at the time you started, you were in the 40s.
Yeah, that was me.
That's a good age to get there.
Let's see, that was 13 years ago.
He was about 20.
And his name, I'm sorry?
Christopher.
And he's with Adobe, I think.
No, my one son is with Adobe.
He actually started a company called Ebrary that's trying to revolutionize libraries.
Really?
Yes.
Is this something I should know about?
Yes, I think so.
Revolutionize libraries?
Well, he's gone to most of the major publishers and said, gee,
deliver me content from PDF, and I will... Here's the goal.
The goal is to be able to go to a place like Amazon, be able to browse the books like you're in a bookstore, and then buy them if you want them, but browse them for free.
And so he provides the infrastructure for doing full-text searches across all of the textbooks and being able to highlight where you find it.
entries, being able to cut and paste text out of it.
That's fantastic.
If they have a website or something, I can search.
It'll go live probably in about a month.
Tell me just the name of it.
Ebrary.com.
How do you relate to the books?
Do you read them?
Yes.
Well, actually what I do...
is I look at the books very carefully, and then usually I'll go out and buy a translation if it's in a foreign language, but if it's the real book, I'll try to find a cheaper way to, like optics, you read out of a paperback.
And so, if you can kind of describe the leap from the collection to Octavio.
The thing that really struck me when I started collecting
is before I became a collector, I really didn't even know that these books existed.
I mean, you knew that they existed.
They existed as artifacts available to a person such as yourself.
That's right.
And the other thing is, well, you didn't know what kind of places they were stored in, what they looked like, because the general public has no access.
I mean, if you go to the British Library, you have to say, oh, I'm a researcher in Shakespeare.
I have a specific need to see this.
You have to demonstrate your need to see something.
That's right.
And I said, well, this is a shame, because the libraries obviously have the charter to protect these things and keep them from being damaged.
But you would think that they would also want to get them more publicly available.
So in the process of sort of inventing Acrobat as part of Adobe, I said, gee, the technology is coming to a point where it really is feasible to capture these books and make them available on a much broader basis.
And so we started Octavo.
But the other thing that happened, the key point was that, let's see, what was the point I was going to make?
The technology was coming along where you could actually make it happen.
And you could satisfy both parties.
You could preserve the real artifact by photographing it once, but make it available on a CD electronically.
And I think we should point out, you say the technology was coming along.
You were developing technology.
That's right.
This technology that he's writing.
I mean, this adds an element to collecting that is unprecedented for me.
It starts with your books.
These belong to you.
I believe that the first issues in Octavo come from your collection, right?
How many titles from your library became Octavo?
Well, all of them eventually will.
I mean, you're doing other things with Congress.
Well, and I said, gee, if
We started with my collection because it was available, but then we said, gee, there are some things I don't have, like a first folio or a Gutenberg Bible or things like that.
Let's go start talking to the libraries and see if we can... Well, you know, there will be a first folio for sale this fall.
I mean, Abel Berlain's books have been announced, and we're going... He's in my new book, in fact.
So he's putting one up?
He's an elderly gentleman, and he's been sick, and he has probably the finest first folio
in private hands.
I mean, it's in its original binding, there were no pages missing, it's a perfect copy.
He also has a second folio, a third folio, and a fourth folio, and his third folio, oh, by the way, the first folio bears the prior ownership signature of John Dryden,
And the third folio... That's not going to go for much money.
No, it'll go way more than that.
I think so, because there are only six first folios, I believe, left in private hands.
And it's by far... Well, and the foil copy was really bad.
And the foil copy was bad.
But the third folio is also totally documented.
I mean, the Fovenons were John Fleming's books, which Abel brought from John Fleming.
And his third folio was the volume that Samuel Johnson used when he was preparing his edition of Shakespeare.
I mean, so do things like provenance and association matter to you?
I guess there is a bit.
Well, all my copies of Darwin's belong to his cousin.
Yes.
So they're William Fox Darwin's copies, and they're all inscribed.
And Darwin really didn't inscribe it?
No, this was his secretary, the inscription, but they're still called presentation copies because his secretary did it.
They're still called presentations.
Well, that's extraordinary because he does very few of these.
That's right.
And actually, any Darwinist, Haskell Norman, he had...
Well, I bought the whole collection.
So you bought Haskell stuff?
Yes.
Haskell stuff?
No, I bought, no.
This was offered before, and these were all, these are all association copies.
They all belong to Darwin's cousin.
Yeah.
Did you know Haskell Norman, by the way?
San Francisco?
No, I know his son.
And Jeremy, of course, is his son.
I would have thought that science and... Well, book collectors don't get to know each other very much, do they?
These days... More so, probably.
No, I think less so.
I think I'm particularly aware of him.
The Internet has changed things.
And you don't buy over the net, do you?
I mean, you don't have to see the book and handle the book?
Oh, yeah, sure.
I never... Well, I would never buy blind.
I've always got to see it.
Do you have a want list?
I mean, is this... Oh, sure.
It's a big Kepler book.
It's on my want list because I don't have it.
Do you have a Vesalius?
I do have a Vesalius.
You do?
Oh, yeah.
Oh, I've got... Oh, I've got some really nice books.
I have a Sigerius Nuncis.
Wow.
I have a Harvey's Mortis Cordae.
That's fantastic.
I have the really rare ones.
I have the...
the wonderful and great book of The Voyage of the Beagle that has all of the animal engravings in it, which is also really rare.
I have the first printing of the Bill of Rights, but I have the only private copy.
Look at the smiles.
The tape doesn't reflect the smile, unfortunately.
This is a collection.
I hope at some point you can show us some of these books.
Oh, sure.
I'm sure.
Well, that was the other thing I was going to say.
I started giving these talks.
I was chairman of the Technology Museum in San Jose, and they were having a party for the donors who were giving money to the Technology Museum, and they said, John, would you give a book about your collection?
There were actually two presentations I gave.
One was to a TED conference, and I said, you know, if I just go talk about the books, it's not going to be right, because in order to appreciate these books, you sort of have to see them and touch them and feel them.
And so I took about a half a dozen books down to this conference in Monterey, patted them up, loaded them into a tub, put them in the back of the car.
You've got more cars in the back.
And I said, and...
And I took the Bill of Rights, too.
And the speaker before me, you have to get the context to get this right, but the speaker before me was the young man who stood up in front of the tank at Tiananmen Square.
Oh, really?
And faced down the tank.
How do you follow that act?
Well, he talked about his father, who was an academic and who had been in prison in China, and how important intellectual... I'm going to get all teary.
because this was just incredibly emotional.
And he talked about the importance of freedom.
And then I got up and I said, well, here's the Bill of Rights.
That's a great book story.
There wasn't a dry eye in the place.
And how did he respond to that?
Oh, he just did.
I mean, he was just overwhelmed.
And of course,
Does the original artifact have, and in fact, this came up with the LC conference, the iconic texture, the iconic value of an original artifact.
The Bill of Rights is available on the internet.
Oh, sure.
Anybody can go download a text of it.
Anybody can go down and download a text of the Declaration of Independence.
Not the same.
Spend five or six million dollars for a copy.
So what is there about the artifact, I think, that elevates it above the text?
Because it is relevant to what's going on in the world, I think.
I don't know.
The artifacts transport you back in history.
The text doesn't do that.
The artifact does.
I mean, it has this property that you're seeing it the same way that Darwin saw it or Newton saw it or Haley saw it.
And you see Haley's engraving in Principia.
Do you have a Principia?
Oh, sure.
Don't tell me you've got a Copernicus.
Yes.
Who said that he never got a Copernicus?
Haskell Norman never got a Copernicus.
He got one.
He bought one from Howell, here in San Francisco, and it turned out to be the one that had been stolen.
Yes, right.
And he had to return it.
So, remember he said, I hope to get the great Copernicus, and he never did.
And so you've got a Copernicus.
I have a Copernicus.
Yours isn't the garden one, is it?
No.
Mine is actually, I talked, Owen Gingrich came out to see the Copernicus.
And he said, mine's the largest copy he's ever seen.
Really?
It has the original staining.
It's never been trimmed.
It also has no annotations in the margins, which really disappointed him.
Well, that's what he's trying to determine.
Yeah.
He was moved by the greatest book never read.
Yes.
He was trying to determine that it was read, of course, by the annotations.
So yours has no annotations?
No.
Without any trim margins?
No trim margins.
Well, and it has this end stamping on it of the original owner.
It actually came out of Poland, I think.
Wow.
And you got that from a bookseller?
Yeah.
Do you buy at auction?
Sometimes, yes.
Are you familiar with Bill Gates's collection?
I know a couple of things that he's got.
I don't know the extent of it.
You were collecting five or six years ago.
Were you tempted, say, by the Codex Leicester?
No.
Because of Adobe, I'm mostly into printed works.
I'm not into manuscripts.
I have a couple of manuscripts, but I don't collect manuscripts.
Octavo really goes after manuscripts, however.
It does.
It's now going after you.
That would seem to be a really natural thing for Octavo, because the manuscript, by definition, is unique.
Well, the Library of Congress is making available the Mozart and Beethoven manuscripts.
How could you not get excited over the Mozart and Beethoven manuscripts?
Fantastic.
And I guess to go back to what you were saying about
the artifact, and all of it's what they call the paratextual elements.
And it's not just the text.
No, it's not the text.
It's the type.
It's the layout.
It's the design.
It's the feel of the vellum if it's vellum.
How do you try and share that with the readers of Octavio?
Is that possible?
Well, the layout and the text clearly is.
I mean, you get as close to visually to the book as possible.
But you don't get the tactile.
or you don't get the sort of the feel of the binding or the smell.
But I don't know how you do that anyway.
Well, digitally, that could be possible at some point.
Well, maybe sometime in the future.
That's not something you're working on, to be sure.
No, mostly just getting the visual aspects of the binding and everything.
Of course, with books like these, how do you photograph them without...
Obviously, you know guillotine books.
No, we don't.
No, no.
They're all opened.
Just as though you... Yeah, sure.
No, it just opens it.
You photograph it as though you're reading it.
So, but are the waves in the octavo editions, or have you been able to... They're fairly... No, they're fairly... They're there.
It's as though you're looking at the book in your lap.
Just simple.
And the lighting is very special to show the texture of the paper and...
and the imprint of the text and the type, and you could fill the screen with a single letter.
Yeah.
Now, you invented a language.
I mean, you actually did you bring this technology to bear?
Oh, absolutely.
And I wonder if, you know, we're ready for the general reader, but could you tell me what challenges were involved?
Well, Adobe played a very
has played a very special role in sort of the history of printing.
We brought out a technology in 1983, and over the past 18 years, it has completely changed printing.
I mean, really completely changed printing, not just a little bit, but across the boards, newspapers, magazines, textbooks,
All advertising, publishing.
Using your technology.
It became a standard and a very ubiquitous standard.
And so almost everything that you see visually that is printed uses our technology.
Whether they're package labels on grocery store shelves or the covers on Frito-Lay or the printing on a Coke can.
They all use our technology.
What was the perception?
What did you see that the people at Xerox didn't see?
We figured out how to bring all of the graphic elements and the type elements and the image elements together on a common open platform.
And that essentially, all the systems prior to that were proprietary, special purpose kinds of things.
And we sort of flattened the playing field and made it open.
It just changed publishing.
Amazing.
So that technology and sort of the understanding of the history of the graphic arts and then these books is becoming part of the book.
But central to this is to replicate the original.
Yes.
Isn't that right?
Oh, absolutely.
And why is that important?
Why isn't it?
Every high school kid in the world should be able to see what Ben Franklin's book on electricity is like and read it.
Because when Ben Franklin was inventing.
I mean, these are his letters to Collingwood, and he's inventing, and the kite experiment is in there.
And the way it's sort of mangled by history physics teachers doesn't show the invention process.
I mean, if you read Galileo, the English translations of Galileo, it's very different than the way Galileo is presented in a physics class.
Because you're seeing Galileo figure it out.
I guess, you know, I'm trying to work in this whole... It's almost becoming a...
cliched, hackneyed discussion, but nevertheless, the certain, as some people purport, certain obsolescence of the printed book.
I wonder how you weigh in on that as a pioneer, as a member of the computer.
It will be, you know, eventually it may happen.
It certainly won't happen in my lifetime.
People have asked me when electronic books are going to take over, and I think
It will be when kids learn how to read off of the screen.
In other words, when their primal learning process about information doesn't come from a book, but comes from the screen.
and they actually learn to read off a screen, then that will sort of wire off all their cells to prefer that mode.
And that will be a long time.
But you don't think that that's even happening in many instances?
No, not yet.
Well, it's starting to happen.
It's happening with music and Napster, and how music gets delivered is changing very rapidly.
Do you think that computer technology will, in a way, liberate the book and allow the printed book to achieve its...
Well, it'll certainly allow you to go back in history and see a lot of things that you would normally not have access to.
I mean, the internet right now, I mean, just bookfinder.com allows you access to buying books that you could never find.
That you could never find.
I use it all the time.
I use it all the time, too.
Not necessarily for rarities or antidote, but just books I need.
Just books you need, right.
And I want and would never... I mean, I went up the other night and...
We were looking for a videotape of an old movie.
The videotape is out of print, but there were some used copies up there.
went up and bought it.
You know, you remember when photography, and you're a photographer, I understand, when photography was invented in 1839 with the fear and the anxiety of the great portrait painters?
Yes.
We're dead.
This is the end of art as we know it.
There will always be fine press books.
Exactly.
So what happened?
I mean, since the impressionism, post-impressionism, everything else.
Well, there's this other interesting thing happened.
Have you noticed if you go into flax or art stores,
People have this incredible variety of paper that will now feed through laser printers.
So people have this, they now know that they can create all the ink.
Now they want to go buy the special paper so that they have something unique about their thing that they're producing.
Here's a gentleman, and I thought this was him.
escapes me, but he's a pioneer in the computer field who collects dead media, old computers.
Are you familiar with that?
Yeah, yes.
Is the book, in your view, destined to become a dead medium?
No, it's going to outlast probably most of the media.
I mean, I have a 1468 copy of Summa Theologica that was printed in basals.
And it's just, it's on this, it's an incredible, oh, it was William Morris' copy, too.
And it's on these incredible boards, original boards in the original chain that went to the library bench, you know, and the thing,
The book was never pressed, and so the pages undulate with these impressions of the type, and it has this texture.
It's just amazing.
This thing's 550 years old.
It's just an amazing piece.
When you started this, did you even know the word incunabula, incunables?
No.
No, that was in the process of learning all of this.
And did you contract any of the symptoms of the gentle madness?
Oh, definitely I haven't.
I'm not a boat buyer.
I wouldn't go buy a collection.
No, why not?
Well, I don't know.
He used to buy them 111 collections.
Yes.
And he said he bought the intelligence that went into forming it.
So you're building the kind of collection that somebody like Huntington would come along and just snap up.
Yeah, it's amazing.
But it is interesting that you said that you were moved by the Printing and the Mind of Man exhibition in that catalogue.
Do you have a name for your collection?
No, it's just mine, Warnock Library or whatever.
Would you call it a high spot collection?
It is a high spot collection.
I would definitely call it.
First editions of Kant, Descartes, Hume, Berkeley, Hobbes.
I'm trying to think.
I have most of Einstein's papers.
I have some original Mendel, which is rare.
In economics, I have Ricardo, Adam Smith,
and the first edition of Malthus.
Of which?
Malthus.
Are these people that you read in graduate school?
Yes.
Yeah.
Samuel Johnson's.
I got a three-volume by Samuel Johnson's dictionary, which is wonderful.
I have the first edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica.
Were you a great reader as a youngster?
Well, because of the philosophy education, not as a youngster.
but in college.
Is there any book that you can think of that changed your life, that affected your life?
Oh, a lot of them.
Yeah, I think there are a lot of them.
A lot of the philosophy books changed their life.
Anyone in particular that you can think of?
I don't mean to put you on this thought, but I am interested in another book.
David Hume and the...
I'm a Wittgenstein fan, so I have a lot of Wittgenstein's work, but that's more, that's later, 20th century kind of thing.
The way philosophy was taught at Utah is you started out with Plato and Socrates and you say, oh, these guys got it right.
And then you go every step of the way and you say, well, no, they didn't get it right.
These guys got it right.
And you sort of work up through the history of philosophy and you get something at each stage of the process.
I did a Google search on you and it was amazing the various pieces that have been written about you.
But there was one I was particularly impressed by is
as you gave an interview to a high school girl down in San Jose.
And I thought that was really a nice piece.
Yes, she did a good job.
Isn't that nice that you go and impress to these high school kids your feelings about education in the computer world and books and all that stuff?
How do you weigh in on this following the Nick Baker double-fold business in the British Library, getting rid of those newspapers?
I think he's probably right.
I don't think he has one little quote from you in that book, but I was curious.
I think that libraries do stupid things, and they're not immune from doing stupid things, and a lot of
A lot of libraries have done stupid things like cut the spines off of books and put library bindings on books and things that drive book collectors crazy.
Well, one of the points you mentioned at the Library of Congress conference was, and this whole conference was put together, basically how we can network and get people like John Warnock
to give their collections to the library.
And you said, you know, I want to know how you're going to use it.
Not just that you're going to take care of it.
That's right.
Where was it going?
You're getting 26,000.
I got a number.
They get 26,000 items a day.
A day.
And then you said,
It's like Niagara Falls coming in and it's like a garden hose going out.
I said that to the Librarian of Congress.
He came to visit Octavo and I said, here's my problem with libraries.
I said, especially the Library of Congress.
I said, you've got 26 or 30,000 items a day coming in and nothing coming up.
And how do you mean nothing coming up?
What do you mean?
Well, you've got to travel.
Well,
Fortunately, since that time, they've put their catalog online, and they've made access to at least the catalog.
Now, they haven't made access to the work, but they've made at least access to the catalog.
One of the ways you've described what you're doing with Octavo is that you're trying to create electronic paper.
Yes.
And of course, this again means replication of the original artifact.
Now, I also noted that you emerged from the Xerox part group
And there's a counterpart in Cambridge, you know, the MIT media, and I've been there, and I interviewed this young fellow named Joe Jacobson, who's doing this, what they call... Yes, electronic paper.
Electronic paper with e-ink.
That's right.
But they call it, they codenamed it the last book, the last book you'll ever need.
Now, clearly, this is not...
the direction you're bringing in.
But how do you feel about that?
Well, I think it's interesting technology, and I think actually the technology will be sort of useful for a lot of things.
But I would never bet on any single technology to sort of be the final answer for any of this stuff.
And the thing that I'm going to say next Monday in my talk to the ALA is, you know,
All the technological advances in printing and publishing have always given the librarian an artifact at the end, namely this book.
And then you've never cared how that book's produced, what intellectual processes go in.
You get the book.
Your job is to protect this book and make the stuff in it accessible to people.
And then that view of a library is out of date.
And has been replaced by what?
And will be placed over time with the fact that there's going to be a companion electronic set of documents and information services, and they have it in their bibliography files right now, but in the content itself.
And it's going to be very important how the thing was produced and how it spews out information and interrelates information to other content.
And so you get to stop thinking about the book as an artifact.
and start thinking about the wider problem of information management and storage and technology.
And not worrying about whether they give you another artifact, like a CD, but worry about this live body of knowledge that will go forward.
You know, there's a very interesting statistic, and I cited it, and I will send you a copy, by the way, if you'd like, to see all these proofs of this little book.
And then the book that you're going to be in is the book that follows this one that's coming out in October.
But I did find a study, a Mellon study, which demonstrates that when acquisitions of monographs at major research universities, like Berkeley, for instance, goes down, the number of PhDs granted goes down.
If you cut back on your acquisitions budget for monographs, I'm not talking about strictly printed books,
That goes down, and I've taken it forward.
That study was published in 1992, and the ALA statistics show that when Berkeley was, you know, the big thing that was going on over here, and I discussed this in the new book, that over the last five or six years, they led the nation in PhDs granted, but they went down.
Stanford passed them by, somebody else passed them by, but in the last two years, when they started putting more money into the collections, the PhDs granted have gone.
I mean, do you see anything?
Did you get correlations with the other universities?
It's very interesting.
In fact, this data that was published in 1992, and I cite it in the book, is compiled from ALA statistics from the 20th century, clearly, but it didn't really take into account what's happened since 1992.
Therein probably lies the more pertinent
data, it would seem to me.
I mean, was there the Vietnam War in the middle or something that could also have had an effect?
Yeah, well, you know, these are social ethics.
But that was the big battle that was going on out here at Berkeley.
I guess I'm pointing to it correctly.
Yeah, exactly.
I don't know.
I know that I find the internet is becoming a potentially marvelous resource.
for getting stuff that you could never find.
I mean, Bookfinder is wonderful.
Well, I mean, I'm a perfect example.
I'm 58 years old.
My first book, Gentle Madness, I started back in the late 80s.
I got stuff for this new book that was through sources that were never available to me.
That's right.
LexisNexis, Google, J-Store.
Just amazing to go to J-Store.
People are going to be amazed.
Where the heck does he find out about how Cardinal Borromeo got this library and, you know, where did they find that renaissance today?
Well, you know, you go to JSTOR and you do a search for Borromeo in books and you get an extraordinary hit.
That kind of stuff, you know, it just makes research certain.
Yes, it makes it.
But you're never going to scan, as the Director General of the British Library says, do you think that we're going to digitize?
Every book in our collection, it would cost 50 billion pounds to do that.
Well, but that's in today's crisis, and that's very short-sighted.
Labor is always going to be expensive, isn't it?
Yeah, but that's assuming that there needs to be labor.
I saw a device the other day that you put the book down, it turns the pages with this incredible robotic system at 90 pages a minute.
I'm ready to see this.
This is a startup company that started out of Switzerland.
And you can imagine it doesn't damage the pages.
It handles them better than any human can because it uses a vacuum system and it barely touches them and turns them very quickly.
And it has a camera system that goes click, click, click, click and starts doing it.
And you can automate the human out of the process.
You can automate the converting of the OCRing of text.
I mean, the technology is not all there yet, but it's getting there.
and you know to put 50 million pounds and saying i'm giving up at the beginning because i can't get there from here in today's economics is the wrong way to think about it so what happens if the british library goes and scans has the capability and can afford to scan all the books in its collection what should they then do with the with the artifact they should keep them they should put them in a very good human because you don't want to make the mistake that the
you know, that the microfilmers made, or any of the other things, because there may be something left to get out of these things.
You know, the Cornell Project, which I write about, not to any great length, but they did 10,000 books, which were, you know, free of any kind of copyright constraints, so they were old, basically 19th century books.
But they went and they scanned the pages, and they made a hard copy, but then they threw away the, you know, these were all guillotine.
That's dumb!
Well, they sliced the bindings off.
They did all kinds of stupid things.
They looked like veal cutlets.
They were stripped, and they were dressed, and they were ready.
They had to be drawn and quartered.
It's a cultural offense, isn't it?
It is a cultural offense.
I'm glad you... Are you familiar with this fellow by the name of Ray Kurzweil?
Yes, I knew Ray.
Of course, when you mention to him, he believes that
You know, I mean, it's almost, he gives you this dismissive look.
I mean, he thinks that print is dead by the end of the decade, and that hundred years... Ray's been wrong before.
I can quote you on that?
Sure.
And I also read, and I love this particular, you say that barely a day goes by when you don't write
some kind of code.
You're not working on writing it.
Is that a factor?
Yeah, I still use computers every day.
But I mean, were you actually creating a code?
Oh, I wouldn't go that far.
I probably don't do that every day anymore, but I still keep my hands in the technology and the products a lot.
Is this kind of an exercise for you, not unlike, say, a poet composing a poem every day?
Do you see parallels in the creative process?
Is there an art to this, I guess?
Oh, yes, very definitely.
And what you want to do is keep in touch with the technology to be able to anticipate what wasn't possible five years ago now is possible.
In other words, what can I pull off today that I couldn't pull off five years ago?
How have the tools advanced in such a way that I now can solve a problem that I couldn't solve before?
And if that problem is economic and has value.
When you look at a software or study a software, can you see the hand of an individual, say, the way you can read a favorite author and say, I know what's the latest.
Oh, programmers do.
There's a book that you should look up if you can find it.
It's called Programmers at Work.
programmers at work and it was done by microsoft press it's out of print bibliophile book finder book finder yeah book finder microsoft and the thrust of this uh it's interviews in the early 80s with all of who were supposed to be the great programmers i'm included in it i feel very complimented that i was included in it but uh
Bill Gates is there, and Gary Kildall, and all of the people who started the personal computer revolution.
And you can get the personalities from these interviews, I think.
But you can get the personality of Sean Monaghan from Octavo?
Well, you know, you can see what drives the thinking.
I don't know that you could get that from code, but... Well, but I mean, in terms of what it does.
Yeah.
I think one of the, again, I'm really well, out of, over my head when it comes to discussing this, entering these areas, but I think one of the things you were quoted as saying, one of the duties of your company, Adobe and
is that it really does reflect the personalities of a few people.
Who's not a big IBM person?
Well, I'm an amateur painter, and I think of myself as a very visual person.
And all of Adobe's products are really trying to focus on how you bring sort of the left side of the brain together with the right side of the brain and make artists be able to use the tools that in the past they couldn't use.
because they were too techy.
I mean, and you really need somebody who straddles the fence to see both sides and who knows what the value systems on both sides are.
Now, you're meeting today with members of the Rare Books and Manuscripts section.
How important are these people to... Well, I would love... I mean, I will never own all the great books, and what you obviously want to do is you want to get as many of the people who have collected these things to feel it's important to share them
as possible, and the libraries to get on board so that you can make them accessible.
Now, this is probably not an area that you get into because you quite specifically say that you are interested primarily in the printed book and not manuscripts.
But I wonder how a technology like this would impact a place like the HRC at the University of Texas, where there
the greatness of their collection is in their literary manuscripts, which by definition are unique.
They really don't want replication.
I mean, their greatness is probably derived from... But they should be photographed.
I mean, like we're doing the Mozart and Beethoven manuscripts from the Library of Congress, and, you know, a music student... I mean,
Mozart, it came out of his head onto paper in real time.
I mean, this guy was unbelievable, and you can sort of see it in the scrawl.
I mean, he was writing furious.
The energy is there.
The energy is there, and you can see the energy.
Do you want the manuscripts?
I think.
Do you have any questions for John?
I know you're just exceedingly busy, so I don't want to over... No, I enjoyed this.
Interesting.
I'm just going to flip that your son picked out that first book for you.
Yes.
He was only 20 years old.
He was quite young to realize.
Well, he knew my interest in mathematics, and I'd never seen a book that old or...
on a subject that I was that interested in before.
And you picked it up and you handled it?
Was there a magical kind of... Oh, absolutely.
I just... What did you feel?
I mean, can you describe it?
I have to own this book.
You've been also quoted as saying that xerography, because you are involved in desktop publishing, remains inferior to typesetting.
Is that something that's about to... Well, yes, it is.
I mean, from just the...
the longevity of the, the toners are getting really good, and the inkjets, the current day inkjets actually are archival, and the inks will last 200 years, and so they're getting there.
The inks are getting much better, the papers are better.
I think I've covered, you know, is there anything else you think?
Well, I, you know, and I've never, I haven't talked to them, I, John Fry is,
one of the only other collectors I've really talked to in depth.
He collects man-to-manics and fries electronic stores all over the West Coast.
But I think I'm the only one driven to make it all available that I have seen.
And not only to make it all available, but you've taken really
heroic status to do it.
And do you see this company as something that obviously profitability matters, I'm sure.
Here's the basic business model.
The basic business model is that the market for any one of these books is really small.
In other words, the number of people who are going to really go out and buy one of these, I think it's small.
But as you build the library and the number that you have,
The revenue line sort of follows it.
And the cost of continuing to digitize and getting libraries to digitize and contribute is fairly constant.
Can I take a couple of pictures of you, by the way?
Sure.
No, that's fine.
I like the way you're doing that stuff with the hands.
I'm sorry.
Anyway.
So the revenue curve and the cost is fairly constant.
So the whole idea behind Octavo is to get enough, over the years, to get enough content out there
so that the thing crosses over.
You don't have the production costs on the web.
So I don't have to print books.
OK, I don't have to hold inventory.
All I have to do is build electronic content.
And then over time, that cost is fairly minimal.
The storage cost is fairly minimal relative to the number of people that you can reach, the content that you can provide.
And to go back,
this did develop out of your collection?
Oh, yes.
Yeah, it was that realization of the lack of knowledge that people have about rare books and their access to, I mean, including my own.
I mean, I'm sure that there are people who grow up in libraries who know that these things exist, but, I mean, I did research in mathematics, and I went to the library all the time, and it never occurred to me to go look at the original books.
And what was the first book that we chose to do?
Was there any special significance?
Oh, that we did at a cover?
It was Shakespeare's collection of poems.
It was done in 1640.
It's terrible printing.
Terrible.
I mean, awful example.
The book is only this big, but it was always collected poems, and it was a first edition that I happened to have.
So you actually chose the humanities for your debut.
Yes.
I have a second folio, but I wanted to get a first folio out of the Folger.
We also picked it because it would be a popular book that people would understand.
That is Shakespeare's, yeah.
And it's amazing when I gave the book talks, I would always take the Shakespeare because it was this little unassuming book that's this big, and you hand it to them and say, this is a first edition of Shakespeare's poems, and they go like this.
They say, wait a minute.
There's another quote, I don't recall where I got it, but we are quoted as saying, I really enjoy seeing other people use the fruits of my labor.
Oh, yes.
And I wonder if you could just elaborate on that particular... Both my partner and I were at Xerox Palo Alto Research Center.
And the research that was done there was totally amazing.
I mean, we had desktop computers in 1978.
We had email systems in 1978.
We had...
Word-like word processors.
Why didn't they come out?
What happened?
Well, they didn't exploit any of it.
And we were doing printing research, and we came to the realization that the corporation that we worked through, that we were going to invent everything that was interesting, and none of it was going to see the light of day.
So you became frustrated?
We were incredibly frustrated.
I mean, we tried to work the system.
We tried to get them to appreciate what they had.
Was this a corporate problem?
It was a huge corporate problem.
Lack of vision is what it was.
So we decided to leave.
And we wanted the company, above all else, to build products that people used.
Did you have any idea that you would be... No.
...where you went?
No.
And as you described how far-reaching your product now... We had no conception that it would have that kind of traction and that kind of acceptance.
So as an initial goal, what was the initial goal?
Built some interesting printers, built some interesting technology that would help the printing process.
We had no... The timing was so perfect.
Canon came out with its very first low-cost laser printer.
The Mac came out with the first graphical user interface.
All this built page maker we had PostScript, it all came together, and desktop publishing sort of sprung out of the earth, and that took over the entire publishing world.
And so you're a publisher?
Yeah.
And it did take a while for this to catch on in many areas, didn't it?
Well, we obviously couldn't handle, in the early days of the little teeny Macs, we couldn't handle four-color publishing, but now almost every magazine on the planet
users are still.
What do you think of this printing on demand?
I think it's going to take off.
I think book publishers are going to not want to keep inventories.
They're going to want to put out a lot of titles.
They're going to want to bring back titles back into print.
And the print on demand stuff can make that happen.
He's very graciously given us an hour of his time.
Is there any, do you mind if we
I contact you for some follow-up.
Oh, not at all.
No, no, let me get it.
Oh, you're welcome.
Well, welcome to San Francisco.
It doesn't well be on the website today.
We're going to make all the books downloadable from the website.
They're big files, but they're
So it's no longer just CDs?
Yeah.
Well, you can browse the books today.
If you go up there, you can browse all the books.
And how about texts?
Is the text searchable?
On most of the CDs, it is.
So on the Shakespeare, there is text for the entire Shakespeare births folio.
Even with those 16th century, 17th century printing?
Yeah, and when you search it, it'll find the words.
How did you solve that particular problem?
We had the text from the first folio, and we matched it up with the images and buried it behind it so that in the search technology, you find it.
The other interesting thing that we're doing is a collaboration with all of the libraries.
We're trying to get every single Porto that was published, Shakespeare Porto, and digitize them all in one group.
So you must be working on the Huntington Library.
Huntington Library, the Folger Library, the British Library, the Library of Congress, all of the people.
They have that great collection down at Huntington.
In fact, the University of California Press printed, and you must be familiar with the Norton facsimile of Forrest Folio.
Now that is a book that takes, the Folger has 79 Forrest Folios.
That's right.
So they took the best of all different pages.
What we did is we took the best of all of them.
So you did the same, you just took one?
We took the, we said, you pick, now I don't want to mix that.
I guess this is what I'm driving at, you know, because Hinman actually made a, he made a hybrid.
Yuck!
Yes, I had thought of that, but that is a question for you, so you don't want to do that.
No.
Because, I mean, it's not synergy.
What's wrong with that, just out of curiosity?
It's not a book.
It's not a thought.
I mean, if there were warts and flies, then they should be present.
They should be.
My copy of the Shakespeare poems, the bottom half of the title page is forged.
It was forged by Quaritch in 1940.
And I didn't know it when I bought it, but that's okay.
But it's such brilliant forgery, except they misspelled the printer's name and the forgery.
And that's how you can tell.
But we describe it in the CD, hey, this first page is forged, second half, you can see, da-da-da, that's what the book is.
I mean, you know, the book is the book.
So the collection is approximately 100 volumes?
Yes.
And is it open-ended, or...?
Oh, yeah.
No, it's... I have some weird things.
Some truly beautiful books and some weird things.
I have this book that was woven on a jacquard loom.
Have you ever seen this book?
No.
What is the book again?
It's a book of prayer.
It's in French.
It was woven in 1859 on a jacquard loom at 240 threads to the inch in silk.
And they printed on this?
No, it's woven.
It's the first digital book.
It was woven.
They built punch cards for every bit, for every thread.
This is a unique book.
No, they made about 50 copies.
But the thing is an incredible tour de force in technology.
Because it truly is a digital book.
It's the most amazing book.
It just glistens.
Where would I find something on this?
It's over at Octavo right now.
If you're going to visit Octavo, they have it.
They have it?
Yeah.
And what should I ask about the book?
The woven book.
Yes.
The threads actually go through.
The black and silver threads.
Let's chat about that.
It is totally amazing.
I can send you some images from the book.
Could you do that?
Yeah.
But to see this book is just unbelievable.
Where should I send you a set of the proofs?
260 Surrey Place.
Surrey.
S-U-R-R-E-Y.
Okay.
Place.
Los Altos.
94022.
Yep.
So this interview, I believe, will be the...
the final comprised, the final chapter of the work in progress.
Oh, great.
Which is to be titled, Life Beyond Life, from Milton's Areopagitica, the books being the precious lifeblood of a mess.
Octavo did a Milton's, I didn't buy a copy of Milton's Areopagitica.
That's the famous quote.
That's how I get that particular title.
And then the subtitle is, The Permanence of Books in an Impermanent World.
So I think that, I really,
we really do straddle these worlds.
And I think you'll see in this new book, Patience and Fortitude, I start with Otto Bettman, who straddled his world, straddled the 20th century.
Is the Bettman archaic?
The Bettman, but we did two interviews with him in Florida, and he was wonderful.
Have you ever seen the Vesalius print where if you take all the plates of the man standing as he gets disassembled,
There's a scenery behind it, and if you put them all together, the scenery stitches together to make one scene in Tuscany.
Wow.
Yeah, and no one does.
Oh, absolutely.
No, I'll send you a file that will have the stitched Vesaliuses together that are just amazing.
You'll do that, Josh?
I'll remind you, okay?
Yeah, give me an email address.
You'll get a PDF file in the mail.
I'll send you an email.
Okay.
How's that?
I have here Warnock at Adobe.com.
Yes.
And I mean, there are things you find out about this.
And in the Vesalius edition, all of the drop caps in Vesalius were hand done for that edition.
And they show cherubs robbing graves, dissecting people, carrying around organs.
I mean, all these little drop caps.
And there's a whole study just to do in the drop caps.
Do you remember Dr. Norman's Veselius?
He had the presentation copy for the emperor.
Oh, it was colored, too, wasn't it?
It was sort of.
Yeah.
But it was argued that that was the presentation.
The royal purple finding.
But it was excusable color.
We have to point out.
He didn't have a colored Fuchs, did he?
I don't know.
I've got the catalog.
My copy of Fuchs is not colored.
I'm not a big fan of McCulloch.
I'm not either.
Well, depending.
Some of the books, I have this cosmographica.
The cosmographica that I have is, the Library of Congress has one.
You've got a cosmographica.
See, I'm drinking my water.
I'm going by Ptolemy.
I mean, come on.
You have a cosmographic.
Yeah.
And my copy's better than the Library of Congress's copy by a lot.
It's got gold by a lot.
Well, Mark Dimination.
You feel like a little kid.
Well, Mark and I always have these conversations.
I say I have.
Well, he doesn't have a serious nonsense.
And he wants my copy.
What is that title, that book?
Sidereus Nunces.
That's Galileo's manual on the telescope, and there are only 24 copies out.
So you must have booksellers from all over the world constantly contacting you.
Is that an annoyance?
I get a deluge of catalogs.
No, it's actually... I thumb through them and see if there's something that strikes my eye.
Have you made a catalog yet?
Have you started a catalog yet in your collection?
And I guess the question I haven't asked is, what do you plan to do with this collection?
I haven't figured it out.
I think my son would love to inherit this.
He's the prime mover.
He would love to end up with this collection.
That's great.
I love that.
That's wonderful.
We have a William Morris Chaucer.
Is that one with paper?
Paper.
But I actually prefer the paper.
It's in the pigskin binding.
It's in the grape binding.
Remember Sandy Berger's?
The Doves Press binding.
We went down to see Sandy Berger when we were doing Gentle Madness.
It was down in Carmel.
Oh, he's had the one with the real Morris collection.
He had the Morris collection.
And who bought that?
The Huntington bought it.
What's astonishing is that Victoria and Alba
His collection was better than theirs, and they wouldn't raise, and it wasn't a lot of money, it was $10 million.
No, it was only five.
Well, I think it was five, that's right, but they valued it at 10.
You got five, and they gave five.
It's astonishing.
I know.
They were not, I mean, we're talking about a national treasure.
The English are really stupid this way.
I mean, they really are.
They have left all of their national treasures out the door.
You've retired, you're still chairman of Adobe, but clearly you're keeping your focus on it.
Can you say that this is a pet baby of yours?
Oh, absolutely.
I also have a Lobachevsky.
But it's a weird copy.
It was sort of a compiled, but nevertheless, they're so rare that I didn't care.
It's compiled from several different journals.
Condition matters to you?
Condition really matters to me, yes.
So you're talking about your Darwin, so if you had an okay Darwin, all of a sudden you had a chance... Well, I got an association copy, yeah.
Let's pick another example, but you had something that was kind of okay, but that's the copy that you have, but now you have a chance to get an extraordinary copy.
I upgrade.
You'll upgrade, but will you keep the other one, too?
Actually, I had a Dialogo that was in its original boards, never been bound.
OK, it was in original boards, but it didn't have the frontispiece.
But it really was a nice thing, but you almost couldn't handle it.
Because you take it out of the box, and you barely didn't want to really turn the pages, because the strings were sort of fragile and everything.
But it had never been bound.
And then Quaritch got a copy, and it had a thick paper frontispiece.
And apparently, most of the frontispieces on the Dialogos were put in on thin paper after.
And the thick one indicated this was one of the first ones.
What I'm going to do when I send you a set of the proofs is I'm going to flag a chapter in there, a section that I want you to read on Abel Berland.
Now what you won't see in the galleys in this set of proofs is that he has just announced, he told me that he's selling, he's just consigned this library to Christie's for an October sale.
And this is this one with the first Vallejo?
Yeah, but he has the most extraordinary William Blake's stand.
We just did... He has the finest copy of Private Hand.
I'll flag this for you, okay?
Just read, and when you read it,
I have it in the present tense.
I had to change it all to the past.
Well, I hope the economy stays rotten so that I have a chance at this auction.
Well, you'll see, he also, his collection is not unlike his.
It's great books.
His children are interested.
This is a fellow that, he basically built the Sears Tower.
Yeah.
So, I mean, he has the means, certainly, to indulge it.
He truly believes that
To quote Robert Hull, if the collectors of the past hadn't have sold their books, where would I have gotten mine?
That's what he feels.
He's unloaded.
I'm very predisposed to do that.
I would have to figure out a really good reason not to do that.
What is another first folio going to mean to the Folger Shakespeare?
Yeah, nothing.
So why shouldn't a collector who loves it
and somebody pays X millions of dollars for it, I think is going to take good care of it.
Yes.
You know, it's not going to get shunted down in the basement of the British Library.
Yeah, they, which happens.
Which happens.
Unlock it, then start the car, and then try to unlock it again.
I don't want this.
OK, all right.
I did it.
I love these.
How's this for a parking spot, Barb?
There you go.
Okay, it's not open.
That's a slope of luck.